>> Hi, Ray. How are you doing?
>> I'm doing very well.
>> Great. Well, I'm just -- I feel just thrilled to be speaking with you today.
I love that you expressed interest in this topic of education.
And I'm really excited about this.
I think it'll be a great one.
The topic is education.
In other words, how can we grow a rich, dynamic, and just a quality education in the year 2020 and beyond.
What does this look like?
How can it be cultivated?
I think you're a great person to talk to when it comes to this.
Would you mind, I think, for our listeners, the people who might listen to this and enjoy this,
would you mind going into your background?
Why are you such a good person to listen to when it comes to education?
>> Oh, I actually started thinking about education when I was about eight years old.
We moved to Oregon from San Diego, and I had a couple of years at a very tiny school.
I think there were a dozen students in eighth grades.
And so as a third grader, I got to listen to the lessons for all of the grades.
And when I got to the junior high, I realized I had already heard the lessons for a couple of years previously.
And we had a little encyclopedia published about 1930, and it had an article about experimental schools.
And I heard about Bertrand Russell's, the private school he started, and his wife.
And that really got me thinking how good the experience was in that tiny country school.
And then when I got to the city schools, how regimented and deadening it was.
So all the way through high school, I experienced that stifling effect of most of the classes.
For example, the biology teacher at 10th grade biology refused to talk about evolution.
Wow. Most of the teachers were similarly backward.
There were two or three very good people, and I realized that getting to know enlightened people was the thing, not taking their courses.
When I went to college, a little state college, I sampled all of the required courses.
And similarly, most of them were taught by people who basically just surveyed what was in the textbook.
Some of them literally wrote everything out on the blackboard laboriously.
And I had a couple of good introductory science courses that the people actually took teaching seriously and wanted to get the main ideas across.
But accidentally, I heard about a literature professor who had a reputation for being a hard grader, but the literature instructor I had first was just impossibly tedious.
So I switched over to the one with the reputation of being a hard grader and found that he was actually just talking to his students and explaining how he saw each of the periods of literature,
and revealing that he had a big picture of what's going on in the world and that each phase of literature was a way of seeing the world from different perspectives.
So I had the expectation that graduate school might have other people like that and found that they were even scarcer in graduate school than in a little state college.
So first I got a General Studies Master's degree in which I was able to pick out professors that I thought were sane and then do a one-to-one reading and conference sort of tutorial with them
and went on to specialize in linguistics and found a couple of professors for similar one-to-one tutorials.
But that was in 1959 and '60. The master's was '56, '57. And at that time, the best of the professors had to be extremely cautious.
For example, the atmospheric bomb tests were going on, and it was, if anyone criticized militarism or the dangers of dumping radioactive fallout onto populations, they were fired from their government jobs and cut off from all sorts of communication.
If a professor signed a petition opposing war or bomb testing and they lost their tenure and/or got fired, the atmosphere was probably just about as bad as the 1930s under Hitler.
But no one really talked about it in the U.S. because it was defined as how democracy works.
So it sounds like it's not just that these teachers, so many of your teachers, so many of the teachers that we probably have all had, were just doing their job and doing what they had learned to do, collecting a paycheck, but it was also that they were afraid in some ways.
It took a lot of guts to teach differently, perhaps.
Yeah, in one of my literature seminars, the issue of, you know, lots of the famous 18th century literary figures were members of the ruling class.
And I mentioned something about the present effect of class on literature and viewpoints, and the professor interrupted me and said, "There are no classes in the United States."
Unbelievable. Wow.
So no one was encouraged then to think for themselves. How did anyone make it out thinking differently?
I got a job teaching at college that year and was assigned to teach introduction to physics for biology majors as one of my courses.
And the president of the college said what he wanted was for the students to be able to understand what they read in the newspapers as well as have the information they should know as a biology freshman.
And since the issues in the newspapers related to a lot of discussion of atom bombs and nuclear energy and quite a bit of discussion about computers, I decided that those would be good themes to talk about.
And so I discussed how energy, what energy means to an organism and what ionizing radiation does to a cell.
And it happened that in the spring term, a visitor from University of Illinois came to give a lecture.
He was invited without assigning a topic. And when he got there, he lectured on the biological effects of radioactive isotopes, just what I had been talking to my students about.
And that week he was fired from his job at the University of Illinois without mentioning his anti-war, anti-bomb test position, but accusing him of supporting sexual freedom among college students.
But the effect of his lecture on radiation was disturbing to the administrators at my college.
And it ended up with me getting fired. And that immediately led me to think about the general issue of college education.
Modelling it, for example, on Bertrand Russel's and the other experimental schools I had read about in the early part of the century.
So I decided to start my own college.
And the professor from Illinois was going on a lecture tour about academic freedom, and he was in the news pursuing the University of Illinois.
And in his lectures he mentioned that we were starting a college that would be free from intervention by trustees.
And so we gathered up some students, and I found that the boards of education in the United States wouldn't let you give a transcript if you didn't have a certain amount of money behind you.
But if you had an endowment of some sort, buildings or property, then you could, in effect, sell your degrees and transcripts.
It was legal to have a degree bill, but not to give even a letter saying that the student had been there if you didn't have money that you had at risk.
So if you said the wrong thing, the state could shut you down and take your money.
My gosh, so just like all these other institutions, it's just been a business.
Yeah, I went to -- that was in California, and I went to Oregon thinking they might have a different attitude.
The assistant secretary of education or public instruction ended our conversation saying "it doesn't matter, education isn't about what students know."
I mean, I'm not surprised because I've been reading a lot of various viewpoints and listening to some of the things you said, but it really troubles me.
I mean, it's deeply disconcerting.
Just back to Blake College, and you said Bertrand Russell was an early influence of yours, and you talked about the experimental school where he and his wife had built.
What were some of the educational practices or some of the educational philosophies that they had going that worked their way into what you did with Blake College?
Just to recognize that each student was an individual, pretty much the same thing that A.S. Neal did at Summerhill, just to recognize that everyone is in the world wanting to understand it.
And they dealt with that, whatever the individual wanted to know and needed to know.
What did you do at Blake with students that allowed them to get to know themselves better and to get to form opinions without, you know, outside influence?
For example, at one point we had an old hotel and several instructors and students had rooms in the same building.
So a professor could say, "At home, I teach courses," and so on and so forth.
And students, if they thought that was interesting, one of them would say, "Well, we'd like to hear you talk about that."
All of the other students who were interested would get together and spend maybe five or six hours continuously in conversation, and typically they would cover at least a semester's coursework at home in one sitting.
It really just sounds so good to me that someone gets to decide what they want to do, that everything's optional.
And then if they wanted to, for example, pass national exams that show they were ready for grad school or whatever, that this was something they could do also, right?
Yeah, they took the Graduate Record exam General Studies -- I forget the -- oh, they were called Area Tests.
They had the departmental tests, history, math, biology, and so on, but they had the Area Tests that were given at that time to graduating seniors across the U.S.
And so if you scored 50th percentile on the three Area Tests, that was typical of a graduate of a four-year college in the U.S.
It was humanities, general, social studies, and science were the three areas.
And we just set arbitrarily the idea that we wanted the students to have the experience of what it was to be there.
And so we said you had to be here six months, two quarters, participating, and then you could take the test.
And they averaged -- after only six months, the students who took the tests, I think their average was 92nd percentile.
Wow, Ray, I love how you're talking about the relationship aspect and the one-to-one opportunity,
and just that you mentioned earlier that, like, if you wanted to -- if you want to learn, then it's the relationship.
It's not the classes.
It's not the things that you're studying.
It's the relationships.
It's interpersonal communication and being with people.
Do you think that the people who attended Blake College were generally feeling the same way?
Did they love it?
Were they happy?
One guy said that he was considered sort of retarded.
He had scored something like the fourth percentile on some tests that he had taken in high school.
And he was only there for 10 weeks, but we let him take the test just because he was a special problem that believed he was not up to the standard.
But after just 10 weeks, he scored the 50th percentile ranking with equal of the average United States college graduate.
So was it that he was accepted and allowed to find his personhood and explore?
I mean cos that's got to be a part of this, right, like the confidence that goes with being able to do what you want grows?
One of our people, he had been a TV quiz kid on one of the TV shows.
He was a straight A student, so they had a panel of supposedly very bright, well-educated kids.
He said he didn't know how to think, and what he wanted to do was just put himself together so that he could think with his knowledge because he said it was completely useless to him.
That's awesome that you were giving opportunities to people like that who maybe were labeled as smart, right, like labeled as people who they received the information out of a book well and they can spit it out.
They could regurgitate information, but that had nothing to do with thinking, and it's cool that even the individual recognized the importance of that.
One of the things you said reminded me of A.S. Neal.
He said once that a good teacher does not draw out, he gives out, and what he gives out is love.
And by love, I mean approval, or if you like, friendliness, good nature.
The good teacher not only understands the child, he approves of the child.
Do you care to add anything to that?
Yeah, do you know Carl Rogers and his client-centered therapy?
I've read a little bit of his stuff now, yeah.
That was one of my -- while I was a psychology major in graduate school for a while, I had a professor that introduced me to people like Carl Rogers.
And his thing was unconditional positive regard was therapeutic in the treatment situation, but it's also educational.
It's essential for learning and teaching just as much as for psychotherapy.
I love that. It reminded me of -- and I don't know how familiar you are with Nietzsche or what you think of Nietzsche,
but apparently, from my understanding, there's this thing called Amor Fasci, or amor Fati, and one of his translations I saw that he said,
"My formula for greatness in a human being is Amor Fati, that one wants nothing to be different, not forward, not backward, not in all eternity,
not merely bearing what is necessary, and still less concealing it, but rather loving it."
And I don't know.
To me, that speaks a little bit to, like, that in order to change something or to see challenges and come up with new solutions, you kind of got to start where you are.
Do you have anything to add to that?
Yeah, you know John Dewey's famous phrase that "education isn't preparation for life,
it is life itself."
Oh, I like that. I like that.
Another philosopher, psychologist that I think was very insightful and useful was Eric (Ernest) Schachtel, who wrote the book Metamorphosis.
And, in that he has the ideas of Allocentric Perception starting in infancy, in which you learn to see empathy, basically, to see that there are other beings and to learn to let your involvement go out
and have them participate in a personal way.
But the way things are set up, people start what he called Secondary Autocentric Perception, in which things are understood and valued only as they are useful in your little
Self-contained world. You don't go out of yourself. You bring everything useful into your control.
Why do you think it is that we learn to do that?
The attitude towards language of the parents and the schools, it usually gets built in by the time a kid starts school with the parents telling them what to believe, basically,
not introducing them to the richness and possibilities of each thing as a complexity that remains to be understood, but giving finished answers
and giving them a world ready to use, but not to get too involved in personally.
Oh, I like that. A.S. Neil, in his writing on Summerhill, he did write something about that.
He also wrote something about that where he talked about how rare it was for him to -- in fact, he didn't even know if his own children were able to be self-regulated
and develop kind of their own way of looking at things. It was just such a challenge for him.
The teacher really can't do anything more than be enthusiastic about living and discovering, and that can't avoid being communicated if the teacher is really living his life that way.
I like that. What else do you think a teacher should be in the most valuable sense? What can a teacher's role be?
Oh, everyone has accumulated lots of experiences, and so being -- sharing your perspective on your experiences expands when someone is really listening to you.
Everything you say is flavored by your experiences, and so when you expand on describing your experiences and perspectives, you're intelligible to the person who is seeing them as part of your personality.
You aren't saying, "Here is this definitely known bit of stuff that you could stuff into your memory, but here is the pattern of problems that I experienced."
And just in using language, you're always ultimately asking your listener to invent what I'm saying. You have to share your minds and I'll invent it while I'm saying it if you will invent it along with me.
Yeah, I like that. And then when I go share my version of what we talked about, it's going to be another creation, right?
Yeah, Alfred North Whitehead made that very explicit when he said, "No sentence is complete and explicit in itself. It always implies everything."
I think that's great. Is that part of what -- I think he had his fundamental stages of learning, romance, precision, and generalization? Is that part of the generalization phase?
Yeah, yeah. What is most personal is also most general and universal. If you really are involved in something and share that involvement, it involves the whole world as you understand it.
So personal and universal can't be separated.
Wow. Didn't Ralph Waldo Emerson in his essay on self-reliance speak to that, saying something like, "Whatever is felt by me is true for everyone." I think he expressed it differently, but is that kind of what he was getting at?
Yeah, Emerson was very good.
I heard one of my buddies philosophy, PhD, and he learned -- he became fluent in German so he could study Hegel and Nietzsche.
And one of the stories he told me about Nietzsche was that he carried around a book bag with him a lot, wherever he went, and it had books, his favorite books.
And he -- I guess my buddy was telling me that he abhorred American writers with the exception of Emerson. He carried around essays of Emerson.
He loved reading Emerson. It always made him happy and helped his thinking, I guess.
Emerson was really much more radical than people think.
One of the things you said earlier, Ray, I thought was interesting about the -- everyone's literature or literature from different periods gives us a window into that time period.
And then you said later about when we share stories, when we talk about what we're excited about, that that might be a window for someone else into some new world.
And it got me thinking about Tolstoy for some reason, because I remember reading somewhere that Tolstoy started an experimental school, and apparently he taught -- he didn't teach writing in any kind of traditional way.
He just wanted people to write, and he wanted people's stories to come out, and he wanted the content to come out, and he didn't grade or look at punctuation or grammar, because he thought that eventually that would just correct itself.
What he really wanted was the story, what someone was trying to say, and just write that.
Yeah, I didn't know that about Tolstoy, but I, at Montana State, was given two or three writing courses every term, and the department had instructions on how to grade papers and how to flunk out.
The policy, I think, was to fail 50% of the first-term students, and they had an absolute way to grade spelling and commas, semicolons, and so on.
And my first few weeks, my students were doing the standard 50% absolute horrible grammar and punctuation, and they were writing idiotic stuff.
And after about five or six weeks, I told the classes that I just couldn't stand reading anymore of that kind of junk, and that from then on, I was going to ignore the mechanics and grade them totally on whether they said something sensible that I could stand to read.
And immediately, their language became fluid, and they all, from that point on, failed to fail.
Wow. It's almost like they were getting a chance to say what they really wanted to say finally.
Yeah, and that's how language works. The form follows the meaning, and if you focus on the form, you destroy the meaning, and that means that your form has nothing to hang on, so the form becomes extremely bad.
A deck of cards, so to speak, almost. It reminds me of biology.
Yeah, in 1968, when students were rebelling against university formalism and such, one of our biology professors said students have to be treated with authority and firmness.
They want to learn to speak a language before they learn the alphabet or the rules, and she wanted to teach science the same way she conceives that people learn language.
But in fact, you learn the language before you learn the alphabet.
Right. I remember reading one of A.S. Neill's accounts of the Summerhill about a boy who couldn't read, didn't want to read, had no interest in reading.
He was 16 years old, 17 years old, he still didn't want to read, and then he decided he wanted to pass some state exams to prove that he had done the high school equivalent or whatever.
And he studied for a couple months, basically taught himself how to read, became a carpenter, I think, as Neil said, and had three wonderful boys and made a living the rest of his life and had his own business and just did so well.
But it kind of made me think of that.
Yeah, I think that applies to everything. You learn the language before you learn the alphabet and how to punctuate.
Every five or six-year-old has thousands of words of vocabulary and can use them to communicate.
When you begin studying physics or chemistry or biology, you should start with the language and learn the punctuation later.
It seems to me like when it becomes meaningful in some context that you need to know the punctuation or the grammar that is this, like you're saying it's something you'll learn at that point, right?
Yeah, exactly. It only has meaning in terms of meaning. You have to have the meaning there before the mechanics has any reality.
That makes sense. Ray, going back to Blake College, at some point, you know, the Blake College experience kind of ended for everyone.
Can you talk about that a little bit and why that happened and what were some kind of extreme positives even though it ended that came out of that?
Oh, several people went to good graduate school, and some became painters. One became a playwright, and they all went on doing what they wanted to do.
And the reason it came to an end was the Vietnam War was going on.
At first, we had a visit from the cultural attaché that said he wanted to just learn what Americans were doing with the school in Mexico, but he asked me why I wasn't – if I was a linguist, a graduate student, why I hadn't become involved with the Summer Linguistics Institute project.
And that was a CIA front organization to train the Indians to be obedient, basically.
But when I told him I just wasn't interested in biblical translations, he put me down to some kind of subversive.
And then a couple of years later, a guy in an army uniform, which was illegal in Mexico at that time to wear a foreign uniform, he came way out to Valle de Bravo and introduced himself as a military attaché of the embassy and said he wanted to interview us.
And I don't know – I assume he asked each of us similar questions, but he did it in private, spent half an hour in my bedroom asking me what my view of the war was, what his purpose was.
Well, and I told him I thought its basic motivation was economic, and it was several months after that a series of events that could only have been organized by some higher powers took place.
In which they organized several levels, including newspaper reporters, and Madeleine Murray, and a guy who had identified himself as from Chicago.
He had clippings showing that he was a janitor posing as a communist for the FBI.
And in Valle de Bravo, he ingratiated himself as an expatriate American.
My father got acquainted with him, got him drunk several afternoons, learned his story.
He showed credentials from both FBI. Marine Corps retired and CIA, and that guy married Madeleine Murray, and she had the project of becoming president of Blake College.
And she – the outcome basically was that she fed stories to the embassy and the local police and the newspapers that the school was a front for Fidel Castro and for drug production and smuggling.
My gosh, so when Madeleine Murray got involved, I mean, you thought her motivations were pretty benign, didn't you?
Yeah, at first she said she was – it started in Maryland. She was accused of beating up two policemen, causing one to have a heart attack, and was wanted for assault, among other things, and went to Hawaii.
And so it looked like she had been persecuted for her atheism, and she claimed to be a lawyer and sociology professor, and so she came to teach sociology.
But even before she got there, it came out that her plan was to have me removed and take over the school.
Unbelievable.
And so after she got there, she married this embassy contact, Dick O'Hair.
Okay. So this happened after her campaign against the schools in America, right, with the Pledge of Allegiance being got out of the classroom and so on and so forth?
Yeah, all of that was prior.
Wow. So the government just really didn't want American college-bound American students to be going to Mexico to learn how to think for themselves.
Yeah, especially during the Vietnam War in 1964 and 1965. They didn't want dissenters, also with the possibility of not being drafted so soon.
Did you ever think about doing what you had done at Blake again at some point?
Oh, yeah, repeatedly. Following that experience, I had the acquaintances in the government, surveillance people who one guy became a lifelong friend.
And years later, when his wife was drunk, she let it out that his business was surveillance.
But every time I would get an idea of going somewhere like to El Salvador or Nicaragua, he would warn me that it wasn't a good place for staying alive.
So you thought you trusted him enough. He was a good enough friend that he had some inner knowledge of how they were watching various situations and people and such.
Yeah, right after he warned me about not going to Salvador, a union guy I knew was planning to go with a group of union organizers from the Northwest.
And the night before he went, and I knew from personal experience that he was phobic for marijuana because he didn't want his union activities stigmatized by being associated even staying in a room where someone was smoking marijuana.
Wow.
But the night before he was to leave to go to Salvador, his apartment was raided and marijuana was planted and it was held in jail while the group flew to El Salvador.
I think it was held only long enough to miss his flight. And the guys that got there were all murdered while sitting in the restaurant.
Oh, my gosh.
So he had a caretaker in the government.
Wow. It just seems to me like it's just one thing to the next, like what is stigmatized in order to assert power or control over a population just seems kind of crazy.
Yeah, there are here and there the good people in bad places who can modify the evil a little bit, but basically the whole apparatus is set up to be obedient to the big purposes.
Do you feel like in some ways the winds of change, be it if they go into kind of a more free direction, is just like one little act at a time?
I mean, yeah.
Yeah, but I started getting discouraged in the late 1960s following the Blake thing and started seeing that the U.S. was being treated on a course to becoming just more of the third world,
that the masses of U.S. weren't on a course of democracy.
And I think that is what we've been seeing progressively.
And I think this current thing of the pandemic or the plandemics,
I think it's a late stage of the process of shaking down small businesses, getting them out of the way,
like the Gates Foundation and the United Nations Agriculture Organization are right now in process in Africa of destroying small subsistence agriculture and replacing it with giant industrial soybean farms.
And the same thing.
Do you know the Corbett Report?
I've heard of it. I haven't watched any of it.
They have a good episode. It's called "Was There Foreknowledge of the Plandemic." And it shows that the Federal Reserve was doing drastic,
historically novel stuff already in September of last year that looked like the beginning of what was only announced several weeks ago as the multi-trillion-dollar bailout.
They were starting on this multi-trillion-dollar pre-bailout already in September.
And an agency of Defense Intelligence Agency, according to an ABC News item that was multiply confirmed, many sources confirmed that this medical intelligence branch reported that around the end of November,
a virus was on the move in Wuhan, but China didn't mention it until late December and didn't start taking action until, I think, 23rd of January.
But our Defense Intelligence Agency already reported it before the Chinese knew about it.
So disheartening. In light of that and everything that seems to be as corrupt and confusing and just kind of bizarre as ever, do you think it makes sense for more and more people bringing it back to education?
Do you think it makes sense for more and more people to be trying to do their own thing and to get out of that institutionalized kind of schematic?
Or do you think it's just impossible to do our own thing?
Well, I think it limits – you're not going to be able to organize on the Internet anymore, but organization on a person-to-person basis I think is necessary.
And the organization basically means communication, putting education processes in the action, making it live, and that kind of reorganization since the system is basically being modified from the top down.
Shaking down all of the dissent by creating unemployment, making them dependent on whatever they can get together and on the way to becoming a total serf, the people who are sensing that something is wrong with the system that they have believed in.
They're ripe for a new way of being, and I think education has to be at the foundation of that.
Otherwise, a fanatical kind of fascism would be an alternative to the well-organized sort of invisible fascism that is in process.
Yeah. I'm glad you said that about education. I feel that in my bones, too, that it kind of starts with education.
Do we have to, in some ways, do you think like almost wear a costume in some ways, like in certain places we go and kind of act like we're following the rules, so to speak, but be communicating kind of interpersonal relationships?
The outward form doesn't matter if you're alive on the inside. If you can create new life forms fully across the system, and then it will at some point be unnecessary to maintain the disguise.
Game in some ways, right? You can play that game in many different ways, which is, I don't know, in my mind, flexibility is a hallmark of intelligence.
So if we can be smart enough to kind of know what hat we have to wear in what room and also have those meaningful conversations and that time for thought behind closed doors.
I don't know. Ray, do you ever feel like you're being watched in a minor way, like with some of the stuff that you've been working on over the years?
Oh, for many years, I was sure of it with that guy whose wife said he worked in surveillance. No matter where I went, he would contact me. I would have neglected to stay in touch with him, but he always knew what I was doing.
And for example, he wasn't there when, like, college was shut down, but he knew exactly what had happened and where I had gone.
I asked him how he knew, and he said, oh, he was in, I think it was Switzerland when he said he read it in an international newspaper.
Wow. So even today, you seem so insightful to me, and you're giving such good information that's inspiring, I think, and you're helping reshape and rework how people feel about biology and health and just being able to think for ourselves.
Do you ever worry that someone's going to kind of shut it down or say enough is enough?
Oh, years ago, I stopped doing personal consultations because the medical people were sending spies, ridiculous people didn't even know how to dress appropriately.
They looked like they were going to a doctor's office.
Wow.
So there was a – David Icke, you know who David Icke is? David Icke did an interview with some guy – I can't remember – Brian Rose, I think, is his name.
He has a podcast called London Real in the UK, and he's been gaining popularity over the years.
I think I saw that very well on the coronavirus.
Yeah, yeah. So I guess they – the people at YouTube, the people at LinkedIn, the people at Facebook, the people at – you know, all the major places where this could be listed or put on a platform, they banned it.
They took it down, and they completely, you know, basically obliterated this video in part one and part two.
And so I guess Brian Rose is – he's going to put out a part three with David Icke that he's hoping more people than in the history of, you know, Internet thing watch it.
But he had to build his own platform so that it could be shown.
I think it was probably part one that I saw, but I watched the whole thing, and I didn't see anything at all that he said that I didn't agree with.
He has the ability to be so far outside the system that he doesn't swallow any of the propaganda.
That's cool to know and hear your thoughts on that. I guess the part three is going to be in eight days or something.
So I'm curious to see how that goes and how long it stays on the Internet.
So, Ray, this idea that learning is important to life – I want to bring it back here.
I just think it's kind of the whole reason we're doing this, and I want to come back to it.
The idea that learning is an inherent desire, an inherent part of life, a part of evolution, a part of development, a part of – like, can you talk a little bit about that?
Like, where does that come from?
It doesn't have to be taught.
Like, you don't have to force someone to learn, right?
Where does learning come from?
Oh, it's something that starts with amoebas, maybe probably bacteria.
Everything is organized and cognitive all the way down to the molecular level.
As soon as it's definable as life, cognition is there, and looking at things under a microscope or following them sympathetically, few biologists are actually able to feel empathy towards a situation, an organism.
But those who look with empathy, with a Carl Rogers attitude towards life, listening rather than imposing belief, see that cognition and learning are the basic reflex of life,
where there's the ability to metabolize and move.
There is understanding and adaptation.
You wouldn't have life without adaptation, and there's always intelligence involved in adapting.
Every day you wake up, you're going to have to adapt to a whole new world.
Everything has changed while you're asleep, and the process of breathing, of your heart beating, it all is cognitive.
And so you have to listen to yourself while listening to things you're understanding.
Otherwise, you will mistake what's happening in yourself for what exists in the world.
Schooling consists largely in training people to get a little model of the world in themselves, which they can then impose for the rest of their lives as they interact with the world.
But if you listen to the events in your own body, meaning that you're having empathy with what you're looking at, then you can see how much of it is your history.
And then you can see what is actually the history of the message or the behavior in front of you.
Wow, that's powerful, I think.
So as an example of -- I think a lot of people think sometimes like rocks and pieces of plastic, for example, are inanimate.
But even rocks and plastic are sensitive and can listen and can learn, right?
Yes, that little encyclopedia I mentioned before, when I was seven or eight, I started looking at that because the school books weren't at all interesting.
I found J.C. Bose described in the encyclopedia and got interested in his experiments.
And he called one of his devices a crescometer. He could amplify the growth of seemingly inert vegetable or plant 10,000 times or so, so that you could see it projected on the screen as it grew.
And then he would provide stimulus of various sorts and show that the plant was reacting with emotion in response.
And he said that everything shows emotion or reaction to stimulation, even minerals.
And at that time, the physicist Michael Polanyi, who later became a philosopher, when he was working on metal crystals and polymers, he was -- I don't think he knew he was following in Bose's footsteps.
But Polanyi was demonstrating that metal fatigue -- Bose said that all substances display the same properties that life does, just in a different form, including learning and fatigue and so on.
And Polanyi demonstrated that over and over through the 1920s, working with metal crystals and metallurgy, that the mechanistic idea of inert so-called material substance was very far off reality.
It wasn't a matter of atom-to-atom organization, but energy was spread out over a wide area, and the structure went below the surface.
And so that explains why airplanes have to be finely polished if they're going to be supersonic, because the stresses of a microscopic scratch on the surface will spread the influence over a great range.
And so Polanyi demonstrated that working the surface of a crystal changed the whole depth properties of resistance and memory of the crystal.
Oh, my gosh. Wow. So, I mean, I wonder sometimes how more people don't hear of these things or learn these things.
I mean, it seems like so many of us ravaged the earth as if we came into it instead of that we came out of it, from it.
And it's organic just like us. It literally is us in some way. It's just kind of crazy to me to think that so many people kind of blindly feel from that, which kind of gives us our life.
Yeah. I think of it as kind of a heresy against life that came to be known as mechanistic materialist science, the official science philosophy of the 20th century.
Well, you had a line once that I really like. You said "the attempt to steer a person can make it hard for them to move because it inactivates their own guidance system."
And I feel like the natural learning process at work and all of life, like the best thing we can do is just kind of get out of the way.
Do you agree with that?
Oh, yeah. The person has everything needed except the answer to each question as it comes up.
I like that. My experience in recent years, Ray, because I've been kind of teaching profession for some years now, too.
And it seems more and more like students are just becoming better and better capable of just regurgitating information, but farther and farther from being able to look at unique situations in many different ways.
And I like this idea that really what we want to do is create a situation where we are looking for real problems and then coming up with questions that really matter.
So in your eyes, what are the real problems and what are some questions that really matter?
Oh, understanding what a cell is, what an organism is, what substance is, and what mind is.
All of those, the biggest questions are still the most needing, clear understanding. Of what causes sickness and aging.
And so at the root of these questions are a deeper exploration of life that will move us into a different way of being, you think?
Yeah. If the present project of the ruling class goes ahead, basically everyone is a mechanical dead inside because they only have the role set for them by the outside system.
And if we all start living fully and realizing that the future is only ours to be lived and created, it should have nothing at all to do with the plans made in Davos or Washington or wherever.
Yeah. Yeah. Wherever did that idea of competition come from as being meaningful in life or in other words, does competition hurt or does it help in the learning process? What are your thoughts on that?
Oh, it helps in the mechanistic system in which the theory of learning for a computer originally was that you punch holes in the card
and limit the possibilities by the holes you punch.
When you're very full of holes, you have defined its behavior most concretely, but the actual way an organism works is that each time it achieves a new synthesis,
it becomes a new question asker.
And so the whole situation changes every time you learn something.
And so you're a bigger and better question asker every time you assimilate the answer to a question or a problem.
Whereas the training doctrine is that you become more and more adept at following instructions.
Is opposition different than competition? That's a different thing entirely, right? Is opposition good versus competition?
It depends on what you're opposing. If you're opposing imposition, that's very constructive.
What about collaboration? Where does that work into it? I mean, it sounds like collaboration would just be a part of everything.
Everything is collaborative.
What are some examples of -- so, Ray, I'd love to just kind of go back a step in an individual's life, if you don't mind.
I think this is really -- I'm really loving this.
And if we were going to go to, like, a young person's life, say three years old to 11 years old, what does an ideal day of learning of life look like for a 3 to 11 year old in your eyes?
Oh, it's necessary to have organisms around. The more organisms, the better as long as they aren't dangerous.
And that includes people. And there should be people talking.
That was one of the things that I thought was most important was, as a little kid, watching adults talk and listening to them and not having anything to say myself but just listening to what they were doing.
And meanwhile, I would be attending to whatever might be the concern a more private way.
For example, watching how the hairs on my arm made rainbows as light as they turned in the light, and starting to wonder how light works, what light is in them, how the eye perceives it.
And the total openness, hearing what's going on in the world, not either approving it or disapproving it, especially just knowing that it's happening.
But then having the undefined world all around you, watching how flies wash their face, for example.
That's really cool. So this is like science beginning to begin its life in you, right?
Yeah. My first little experiment, I think I was about a year old or so, watching when I cried, how the water in my eyes affected the image.
It affected the what?
It affected the image, refracting the light, changing the color, and distorting the image.
Wow. So Ray, what is science?
And at a fundamental level, away from the business of science, in a simple way, can you sum up, what is science?
It's open learning, the idea that learning isn't finished.
You're always wanting to check it against reality, and reality is always changing, and so it's always giving you opportunities for changing your mind.
So truly, a never-ending process.
Yeah, that's where science and education are the same thing, really.
Wow, that's really cool.
So I love how you talked about a community of organisms, and not necessarily people, right, but just all of life.
It's really important, and it reminds me of the expression, "It takes a village." You're taking that expression into a very practically speaking that it does take a village, right?
Oh, yeah. Flies and snails, and plants, and everything included.
That's really cool.
Aside from that, that village of organisms, if you were going to make available a library or an atelier, a kind of workshop or learning space for a young learner, would you have anything in there?
Could you talk about what you might have in that workshop, or what kind of books you would put in there?
I think two or three various kinds of encyclopedia would be good, but once you learn the alphabet, it's really nice to get an idea or a question and look out at the world and see what you think about it,
and then see why you can find other people have thought about it, looking up ideas in the encyclopedia.
Do you think there's anything online?
I know with technology now, we can do that so easily.
Do you think there's anything that's trustworthy or any kind of way we can use online in the trustworthy way in that regard?
Not really. You have to -- not trustworthy, for sure. You have to know that intelligence organizations devote a great amount of energy to Wikipedia, for example.
What are some good hard copy encyclopedia or books? Do you recommend any?
Oh, after the old Funk and Wagnalls that we had at home, I've always used the Britannica's.
I like to have the 1910 or 1911 edition, the 1930s and '950s editions, because the 1960-something edition was dumbed down.
Okay. Do they still make the encyclopedia Britannica?
Yeah, but I haven't looked at them since I saw how they had damaged the 1960s new editions.
You can find the old ones that used bookstores very often.
What are some other sources of information you recommend or ways we can get -- instead of what's being taught,
where can we go for information that's more, you know, kind of what it is versus what's being taught?
If you're near a good library, the libraries have pretty well been weeded out and censored,
but you can still often find things that the censors missed.
You would just -- it's more about reading as much as you can and then learning to just sift through it yourself,
learning to trust your own guidance system and make critical decisions about what you're taking in.
Yeah, and it has to be a library where you can actually go look at the shelves of books
and not have to write down what you want the librarian to bring you.
Got it, okay.
Ray, what about nature?
How can nature, being outside, why do you think that plays a vital role
or doesn't play a vital role in someone's education?
Yeah, things, ordinary natural things as they occur, even at the age of three or four, you're generalizing
and making philosophical inferences from everything you see around you.
So it can be dust and old leaves as much as nice running rivers and mountains and such,
but just watching what happens by itself, it's so complex that in preceding it, you have to interpret it,
and if you don't have someone telling you how to perceive it so you can make it useful,
then your childish brain just naturally tends to get a philosophical general approach to it.
That's really cool, and I like how you said it doesn't matter where it is.
It could be anywhere.
It doesn't have to be some river or in a grove of redwoods.
It could literally just be out in your backyard, right?
Right, backyard nature.
Ray, Thoreau (Henry David), I guess, once wrote something on how he said,
"The primal act of mobility connects us with our essential wildness
and brings us to a spring of spiritual vitality that would otherwise be methodically dried out
by our sedentary civilization."
And I contrast this with the classroom.
Most classrooms are in four walls.
Some of them don't even have windows.
And you're just stuck in your desk, and it's still today.
It kind of really befuddles me that kids still today are asked to sit in a desk for 60 minutes
and listen to someone lecture.
And I guess Aristotle, allegedly, he had the habit of strolling while giving lectures.
So I guess my question is, do you think the wandering or strolling
or just getting out for a walk every day is important?
Yeah, if you can't get up and walk around every time you feel like you're a prisoner
and it damages your brain as well as your body,
sitting for whatever, six hours a day in classrooms, doing that for years,
it's horrible for the bodily health as well as the brain and its health.
So it goes right along with the dogmatic forcing of ideas in the young people's minds.
It collides perfectly with that, sounds like.
I thought that recently, speaking of that,
the prison that you mentioned, 75% of UK students spend less time outdoors than prison inmates.
I can imagine that in the U.S. that number is exceeded or at least matched.
Yeah, that whole approach, I think there's a lot of, like the superintendent of public instruction
who said "education doesn't have anything to do with what students know."
It's the obedience that is the essence of education according to the understanding of the people who control it.
Yeah, and then Ivan Illich have a lot to say about that.
I mean, he has an interesting quote.
It's related to medicine, but I think it's really all institutions.
He says, "Modern medicine is a negation of health.
It is not organized to serve human health, but only itself,"
which reminds me of education, as an institution, and it makes more people sick than it heals.
So, Ray, do you think a more self-directed educational experience for more people
could eventually flip the industry of medicine and educational culture?
I think that's a very important place to start, is totally revising medical school.
When I first taught endocrinology, I think it was at the naturopathic school in Portland,
they were just trying to get going, and they accepted people who were interested in becoming naturopaths.
And one of my students was a 30-something year old taxi driver,
and she was -- you know how taxi drivers have to learn?
She was from Seattle, and she had to have a living map of the city alive in her awareness.
And she could take that mentality and understand the body and the hormones
and the nutrients in a way that a taxi driver is much better at than someone who has got A's from Yale, for example.
Yeah.
When I went back to teach -- do single lectures about, I guess, eight years later or so,
when the school was successful, they were admitting only basically straight-A students from the best colleges.
And those students were just about the most horrible class I ever had.
What they wanted was to give them a recipe. They thought that medicine consisted in learning recipes for treating diseases.
Wow. And that's just not how the organism works in various contexts, right?
Yeah. And that's why medicine is killing people. The official studies that show medical accidents
killing something between 220,000 per year and 440,000 per year, not counting hospital infections of about 100,000 per year,
just those numbers rank medical accidents with cancer and heart disease for a number of people dying per year.
But that's accidents from a medical perspective.
But if you assume that a very large part of what they're doing, for example, right now, putting people on ventilators,
one hospital ventilating people was having a 60 percent mortality from the coronavirus. A hospital nearby
that stopped that conventional use of ventilators had a zero percent mortality.
Wow.
So you can put down a very large portion of the coronavirus deaths to medical stupidity, not accidents.
They're doing what they were taught to do properly and is killing people.
When you add that to the recognized medical accidents, medicine is something like genocide or world war.
That's insane. I recently was hearing some commentary on this, like, heart, like, stroke and heart disease.
Patients have been, like, not coming in recently because they're afraid to go into an environment where, right,
like all these people are going in with the COVID symptoms.
And they think this commentary was saying they think a lot of people are dying at home alone because they're not getting the medical attention.
But I'm wondering if the reverse of that is also true, that some people are not going in and actually it's saving their lives that they're not getting medical attention in some way.
Yeah, yeah.
From that observation in Germany of the two hospitals with different approaches, it was Luciano Gattinoni, I think,
who mentioned that if that sort of thing is true, then you're saving your life by avoiding the hospital.
I wonder, you know, that idea that habits take a while to cement themselves, human behavior is hard to change.
I wonder how many people will get through a time like this where, you know, this has been months now, it seems like, you know,
where we've been told to stay at home and, you know, not do this and not do that.
I wonder if some things as basic as, like, not wanting to go to the hospital.
Like, do you think some of these ideas will last in people?
Or do you think people will just go right back to their ways as before?
I think that would be nice to hope for, that people realize they can get by without doing their stupid job.
Yeah.
I mean, I wonder if some people are actually realizing that they can make ends meet.
And I don't know.
It seems like a lot of people have been so brainwashed and also rely on that check, that working, you know, that job or whatever.
So I wonder about that.
I don't know.
A very big part of the work done in the U.S. currently is just basically to make the person stay in the office 40 hours a week full time.
When I did nutrition counselling for a while, 40, 50 years ago, I found that that was what the employer had in mind.
Even when there was no work to be done, you were supposed to be there from 9 to 5 or whatever.
And it stops people from thinking about what they're really interested in.
And then when they go home, we're so tired that we just turn on the old TV or, you know, it just eliminates the time for thinking.
It kind of reminds me of a Noam Chomsky line, I think he said once, that similarly, students who go to college and they pay these massive debts,
they put themselves through school and they're unlikely to think about changing society because when they get trapped in these systems of debt,
they can't afford any more of the time to think.
Ray, I had a question that was just related to this kind of more -- like Murray Bookchin, have you read his book?
Yeah, I read several of his pamphlets and little things in the '70s, I guess it was.
Okay, and does he kind of talk about a more decentralized, almost anarchist society, similar to, like, Ivan Illich, correct?
Yeah, you know, that kind of decentralization, I think, is the only way a large population can make a society work without destroying people's health and mentality.
A consumer co-op, for example, should be an organizing principle.
If consumers demand that products change, that can be a big pressure, and then the people can have various kinds of cooperative ways of meeting those consumer demands.
Interesting.
So I haven't read a lot of his stuff, but I want to read more of it.
It sounds really interesting.
A friend of mine posed the question, and I thought it was a really good question.
And you might have kind of answered it a little bit in what you just said.
But his question was that because a lot of our scientific development, it seems to him right now,
this fundamental science that we're learning about seems very equipment intensive.
It seems that only large organizations with a lot of funding can actually do these experiments.
And I think you even actually mentioned in one of your articles about in the 1960s there was a government lab with an equipment that no one else had,
and therefore it couldn't be replicated.
Yeah, it's a great opportunity for fraud.
Yeah, so I guess my friend's question was in a decentralized society without large organizations and like basically huge funding sources,
will equipment-related science kind of go away,
or is it going to be like what you said that those demands are going to be met by the cooperative interests?
One of the reasons I went to graduate school for a PhD in biology was that I had many experiments in mind that required equipment of various sorts.
And so when I got there, I would just wander around the building peeking in labs and seeing what people were doing.
And at that time, people weren't so secretive and protective of what they were doing,
and I got to use all kinds of different lab equipment just as a visitor.
Interesting.
But now do you think that the same opportunities would be able to be had by people?
No, I've heard people express attitudes that you have to be qualified to have access to certain instruments.
Did you read the book "Seeing Red"?
No, I have not.
An astronomer.
He was one who observed galaxies that were receiving, approaching the speed of light,
connected with a string of matter to a galaxy that wasn't receiving the speed of light.
He collected pictures of a lot of those,
and people started realizing that was a challenge to the basic dogma about the redshift representing expansion of the universe.
And if you see galaxies that are connected with a continuous stream of matter but with different redshifts,
that makes it impossible to explain the redshift in the conventional way.
So what they did was not let them use the big telescopes anymore.
Oh, my gosh.
So, I mean, yeah, I guess that's kind of like part of my friend's question,
and I'm wondering if we get to a more decentralized situation ever,
and if people, a small number of very curious people end up going toward that they're very scientifically inquisitive,
they want to do science, and if they develop their little playground of science,
is it going to kind of almost recreate this small clique of scientific elite where you kind of have to be one of those people to study it?
As soon as you take away the control of the corporations who are keeping basically a culture of secrecy,
you can't have classified research done at universities, for example.
Twenty years ago, that was basically selling universities to the corporations for funding
and having a lot of the research tied in to the military and corporation private property idea of knowledge,
that whole concept of knowledge isn't compatible with knowledge.
And so I think changing the ownership of the instruments, making them public like they used to be, still in 1970.
So you're saying if the overall values of the decentralized community are that of collaboration and togetherness,
that that probably won't happen, is what you're saying? Yeah.
Interesting.
What do you think about education?
Do you think in general, do you think people will all, because natural learning will be allowed to express itself,
do you think everyone will be well-educated?
I mean, I don't even know what well-educated means in a general way,
but do you think that education will rise in a decentralized environment?
You know, the No Child Left Behind thing where they created standardized exams?
Yeah, that's right.
Blake College accepted the pre-existing graduate record exams and didn't offer any organized survey of knowledge,
but just by being themselves, they for some reason were able to in very short lengths of time master the conventionally accepted the knowledge.
And I think if you ask why they're in school, what are they supposed to be doing, and you say, well, they have to know these things,
then say when you're ready to go to medical school, for example, here's the test that you have to take,
and whatever you do, driving a taxi and leaving the encyclopedia or whatever, that's adequate preparation.
So you can save thousands of hours of sitting in classrooms.
The University of Chicago under Robert Hutchins for 1929 for 10 or 12 years, that was their policy.
Some people could get their bachelor's degree in half a year or so.
I mean, it makes so much sense in terms of the humanitarian humanity side of it and the personal, you know, being a happy person and living a satisfactory life.
Like, it makes so much sense in not creating this apathetic kind of situation for years and years and years,
just so that people can become a worker bee in the system.
And not only for getting entrance to medical school or law school or whatever, graduate school.
If you say a doctor or a lawyer can't practice unless they know certain things, well, there must be an exam for telling whether someone knows those things or not.
So don't require medical school even or law school.
If a person has their own way of learning those things, let them practice.
So in a decentralized state, these institutions and these professions will look totally different, yeah?
Milton Friedman himself, the Chicago School conservative economist, he described licensing as something destroying civilization.
Wow. Ray, did the 20th century Soviet block countries today experiment with some of these things?
And can we learn anything from that?
Yeah. For a time in the '20s, there was tremendous experimentation.
And then as soon as Hitler came to power with his project for dealing with the Slavs, starting right in 1933, experiment ended and got engaged in the business of not being taken over by Hitler.
Gee. So do you think there's other things?
I mean, are there other examples of things we can learn from what they were doing?
Oh, yeah. A lot of good science was really developing in those early years between the wars, psychology, philosophy, education ideas, learning ideas, therapeutic ideas.
Did you write about some of that stuff in your book on mind and tissue? Is that-
Yeah.
Okay, awesome. How can someone get a book like that or any of the books that you've written?
I still have a lot of copies of that printed on paper at raypeatsnewsletter@gmail.com.
Someone could just email you at raypeatsnewsletter@gmail.com, and they can ask those kinds of questions, how to sign up for your newsletter, how to get copies of some of the books that you've written.
Yeah. Okay, great. Are you familiar with Charlotte Iserbyt, I think is her name? Have you ever heard of her?
Don't recognize it.
Okay, I guess she did some critique on the foundational works of modern education, but I just kind of wanted to say this,
and it really just kind of piggyback some of the stuff that you've said, and I wanted to kind of hear if you had any more thoughts to it.
But she said that they were very open. If you look at the foundational works of modern education, they were very open in their design and goal of worldwide scientific socialism,
where all decisions are in fact being made by the experts and not by the citizens.
So thinking, questioning citizens may be desirable for a republic, but it is very dangerous to the scientific dictatorship.
And I think that scientific dictatorship is the opposite of what you think would be good, according to, like, Illich's stuff and Bookchin's idea of decentralization, right?
I think it's an ideology that is starting about 1950. There were people subsidized by the CIA basically laying out the blueprint for exactly that.
Ray, this has been amazing. A couple of things before we close. I'm just so grateful for your time.
I think a lot of people are really going to love this. This is really a treat for me, too.
You know, there's so many people, I think, that are bad-mouthing, you know, homeschooling because it's something different.
Or not even homeschooling, but just doing something different as far as education.
And so some of the common arguments I've heard are kids will miss out on routine, discipline, specialization.
These are all things you've already touched on. But do you have anything else to add to that when someone critiques an experimental education idea?
Well, the state is making itself involved even in home education.
I know, yeah. Yeah, I know. They, like, in some ways, determine what curriculum they think needs to be covered.
Exactly. That should be totally held off for some kind of a big exam day 15 years later.
Yeah. So what can we do? I mean, legally speaking, is there any way to do an education that's actually free?
I mean, in some states, I know they'll put parents in jail if their kids don't go to school.
Yeah, same thing. If you don't take your kids to the doctor for vaccination, they can put you in jail for child abuse.
Just amazing. So what can we do?
Resist.
Yeah, until they take it away, right?
Yeah, invent new ways of resisting and enlightening the oppressors.
Yeah, play the game in submersive ways, right? Subversive ways.
Yeah, some of the oppressors are open to change in learning.
Well, that's hopeful. Ray, I'd like to close. There's an Einstein quote, and I've seen it on the Internet attached to an image.
And I just want to kind of throw this out there, and I'll put it up maybe on the thing when I post this on YouTube so viewers can see it.
I'm sure other people have seen it. But Einstein quoted that "everybody is a genius, that if you judge a fish by its ability to climb a tree, it will live its whole life believing it is stupid."
And it reminds me of that story you told me earlier about the kid who came into your college who, by all the testing standards, showed that he was basically dumb.
And when given the chance to kind of craft an education and a way of thinking that was his own, he revealed that he was nothing of the sort.
And so this image is like all the animals lined up, and they have like a bird and a monkey and an elephant and a fish and a seal and a dog, and they're all lined up in front of a table.
And there's a judge behind the table, and the judge says, "For a fair selection, everybody has to take the same exam. Please climb that tree over there."
And I think that, I don't know, to me that just epitomizes this strange and backwards world we live in and some of the opportunity we have to oppose that.
If you were to do something else, there should be a different exam for it.
Exactly. Well, I guess cheers to continuing to try to come up with ways to craft meaningful existence, right?
Yep.
Awesome.
Well, Ray, thank you so much for your time and to the other person in the house.
I know, I'm sure it's a lot to let you do these interviews and stuff, but I appreciate her giving you the time to do this.
And thanks for letting us get into your life for a little bit. It's really awesome.
Okay. Thank you.
You're welcome. It's my pleasure.